Daniel Miller
 Hunting the Wild Yak and Chasing Tibetan Wild Ass 

Daniel Miller


The big, bull wild yak, was facing us now, less than 50 yards away, with head lowered and looking like he was going to charge. His bushy tail was raised in the air and his front feet were pawing up clods of dirt. We had spent the last two hours sneaking up on this wild yak to get a shot at him and now, lying exposed on the ground, I noticed that the nearest rock wasn’t big enough to hide a rabbit.
“If he charges, we both stand up together and then you try to take a shot. Maybe the noise of the gun or the sight of us both standing up together will scare him off,” whispered Dan Pletscher, a wildlife biology professor from the University of Montana, lying on the ground next to me. 
Watching the yak paw the ground and wave his tail in the air, I recalled the tales of the late 19th century Russian explorer, Nikolai Przewalski, who wrote, “Wild yak shooting is as dangerous as it is exciting, for a wounded beast, especially an old bull, will often attack the pursuer.” Now I was confronting an old bull wild yak with nowhere to run to and no place to hide. 
I knew there was little chance that the tranquilizer drug in the dart gun I was carrying was going to have much effect in the ten seconds that a ton of wild yak could be on top of us, even if I managed to hit him with a dart. 
“Here he comes,” said Dan, as the bull lunged forward. We both stood up, next to each other, and the yak suddenly came to a halt after charging about 50 feet. He stood there for a moment and then whirled around and ran off, his tail waving in the air like a flag. I remembered to breathe again and marveled at the sight of the wild yak running away with a backdrop of the soaring snow peaks of northern Tibet. 
Wild yak bulls in northern Tibet. Reaching up to six feet at the shoulders, they can weigh up to a ton. Bulls also have a reputation for charging unprovoked.
I was in the Wild Yak Valley in the Kunlun Mountains, on the northern ramparts of the Tibetan Plateau; one of the last sanctuaries for the wild yak. This was the edge of one of the last unfenced frontiers on earth. To the south, for over 250 miles to Lhasa, stretched the steppes and mountain ranges of northern Tibet.
To the west, the wild landscape extended for another 800 miles to Ladakh in northwest India. And the valley floors were at elevations higher than the highest peaks in Colorado. This was the chang tang, meaning “northern plains” in the Tibetan language; a vast, largely undisturbed alpine and desert steppe environment that encompasses much of the northwestern Tibetan Plateau.
Think of an area the size of Arizona and New Mexico combined to get a sense of the scale of the Chang Tang. And then, picture that landscape — about 230,000 square miles — with few roads and inhabited by only a small population of Tibetan nomads. 
The Chang Tang is a wilderness region so immense that it rearranges your whole perspective on wildness and freedom. 
A large “nursery” herd of wild yak cows and their calves in the Wild Yak Valley at about 16,000 feet. In the summer the sedge meadows provide good forage for the wild yaks and other wild ungulates such as Tibetan argali, Tibetan antelope and Tibetan gazelle.
I was attempting to shoot a wild yak with a dart gun to tranquilize one and attach a radio collar on it in order to track its movements via satellite. Satellite tracking of wild animals has proved effective in studying the behavior of many species and, since so little was known about wild yaks, it was believed that putting a radio collar on one would help provide information about their ecology.
It was not known if wild yaks made long distance movements between summer and winter ranges or what their preferred habitats were. Such information would be useful in developing conservation programs for the wild yak and other Tibetan wildlife. 
Wild yaks characterize the elemental wild nature of the Tibetan Plateau. No other animal so evokes the raw energy and stark beauty of Tibet.
Looking for wild yaks in the Wild Yak Valley. Having worked as a cowboy in Montana before, I knew that the Mongolian or Tibetan saddles were not going to be very comfortable when spending long days in the saddle, so I brought my own cowboy saddles with me.
Standing almost six feet high at the shoulders, wild yak bulls can weigh up to a ton. Their horns, which can reach three feet in length, are still used as milk pails by Tibetan nomads. Wild yaks are magnificent animals. Their long hair hangs like curtains, almost sweeping the ground, and makes they appear even more massive than they actually are. The wild yak is an indicator species; its presence reveals a special place. With wild yaks roaming the landscape, an ecosystem is still intact.
If the land can provide habitat for wild yaks, many of the other species of Tibetan wildlife will be there as well.
On the left you see the upper reaches of the Wild Yak Valley. The valley floor is at about 14,000 feet and supports productive grasslands. Common grasses in the Wild Yak Valley include purple feather grass (middle) and a species of Poa (right).
The first Westerners to visit the Wild Yak Valley were the Indian civil servant Arthur Carey and the Scottish explorer, Douglas Dalgleish, in 1886. They came from the west, along the Kunlun Mountains and passed through the western part of the valley.
Ten years later the Swedish explorer, Sven Hedin, coming from the west, travelled through the Wild Yak Valley and saw herds of wild yaks, Tibetan antelope and wild ass. One hundred years later, when I first ventured into the Wild Yak Valley, there were still large herds of wild yaks.
Map of the Chang Tang Reserve in Tibet. The Wild Yak Valley, where the author first did research on wild yaks is located southeast of the town of Golmud in Qinghai Province. On the right is a NASA satellite image of the Tibetan Plateau.
As part of a collaborative research program between the University of Montana and the Chinese Academy of Sciences, I spent two summers in the Wild Yak Valley trying to shoot a wild yak, but never managed to get close enough to one to get a shot.
Scrambling across the mountains at high elevations, while carrying a rifle, radio collar, and camera gear, as well as extra clothing and some food, was hard work and getting within 30 yards of a wild yak to get a shot with a dart gun proved difficult. In addition, wild yaks, like all wild cattle, have incredibly acute senses of smell and hearing.
Left: Mohan, the Kazakh guide, looking for wild yaks in the Wild Yak Valley. Right: Rich Harris, my colleague from the University of Montana, and Mohan returning to camp in the Wild Yak Valley.
Female yaks are also usually found in large herds of cows and their young — the largest herd we saw had about 300 animals in it — and, with all those noses and ears, and with senses honed from thousands of years of evolutionary behavior avoiding predators, getting close to a wild yak was not easy.
In the summer, wild yaks were primarily found grazing in sedge meadows at 15,000 to 16,000 feet on the edges of glacial moraines; oases of lush forage in an otherwise stark environment.
Our research camps in the Wild Yak Valley. Even in the middle of summer snowfalls were frequent.
Although I was unable to put a radio collar on a wild yak, I learned many things about their behavior. One key finding was that high elevation sedge meadows are a critical habitat for wild yaks in the summer. I used Landsat satellite remotely sensed images to determine the location and extent of sedge meadows.
Landsat false color composite image of the Wild Yak Valley. The purple is snow and glaciers. The bright orange coloured areas are sedge meadows, one of the key habitats for wild yak and other wildlife in the summer.
Satellite images can depict vegetation patterns on the ground and the sedge meadows show up clearly as a bright orange color on a false color composite image. With such information about potential habitat I was able to more easily plan survey routes to find wild yaks. Observing them for long hours, I noted the numbers of yaks and composition of the herds, where they grazed, and for how long.
Little bits of information that, like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle, are put together to gain an understanding of wild yak ecology. This early work in the Wild Yak Valley proved useful in my later work in the Chang Tang Wildlife Reserve and elsewhere on the Tibetan Plateau. 
From old explorers’ accounts it was known that wild yaks were once widespread throughout the Tibetan Plateau and numerous, probably numbering in the millions. 
Years ago, when I began research on wild yaks, there was little scientific information available on them. No one was certain how many wild yaks were actually left, although some Chinese scientists had estimated their numbers at 10,000. Now, based on more extensive studies by Dr. George Schaller and his Chinese and Tibetan colleagues on projects supported by the Wildlife Conservation Society, there are an estimated 15,000 wild yaks left in Tibet. But these remaining wild yaks are only found in the most remote areas, far from the poachers’ guns. 
The author with skulls of wild yaks in the Wild Yak Valley. Right: Male and female yak skulls; male yaks are much larger than females.
The Wild Yak Valley is an important refuge for wild yaks. The main valley, which runs west to east is drained by the Naichi Gol, or Kunlun River, and flows into the Qaidam Basin to the north. Glaciated peaks of the Kunlun Range rise to heights of 20,000 feet.
Rimming the south of the valley, the glaciers provide snow-melt for extensive, lush sedge meadows that are a favoured habitat for wild yaks in the summer. Productive grasslands occur on the valley floor, at elevations of about 14,000 feet. 
We counted over 1,000 wild yaks in the Wild Yak Valley with the largest herd containing about 300 animals. 
Besides the wild yak, the Wild Yak Valley is also an exceptional sanctuary for other wildlife species. There are large numbers of wild ass, Tibetan gazelle, blue sheep, Tibetan argali and white-lipped deer. Brown bear are found as well as other predators such as lynx, snow leopard and Tibetan fox. In the early 1990s, Tibetan antelope were also found, but have since disappeared, perhaps because of poaching.
The remarkable diversity of wildlife found in this corner of the Tibetan Plateau is truly impressive, indicating that the ecosystem is largely intact. Yet, herders with their livestock, along with gold miners, are venturing further and further into the Wild Yak Valley, threatening the future survival of wildlife.
In the top photograph, an old bleached out wild yak skull with nomads’ horses grazing nearby in Wild Yak Valley. Below you see Tibetan gazelle, commonly found in the grasslands.
The long, slender seeds heads of feather grass glistened with morning dew as I lay on the ground watching the graceful Tibetan gazelle in front of me. Unaware of my presence, they continued to pick out delicate little forbs to eat, avoiding the taller, coarser grass. From this vantage point on the ground, I could also focus on the plants in front of me.
Although the purple feather-grass, with its long, hair-like attachments to the seeds that blew gently in the wind like slender silk banners, appeared to dominate the vegetation, there was actually a rich medley of plants when you looked closely. A small flower, with yellow petals, related to the rose family was common. This little flowering herb, Potentilla bifurca, is high in protein content and was the plant the gazelle were seeking.
On the northern plains of Tibet, small mammals like gazelle prefer these little forbs. Larger animals, like wild yak and wild ass, will graze almost exclusively on grasses and sedges. The diets of domestic sheep and goats often overlap with those of the smaller wild animals like Tibetan gazelle. 
To the untrained eye, that is unable to distinguish one plant from another, rangelands can appear boring, especially in Tibet where the steppes stretch across the horizon to magnificent snow peaks in the distance.
But it is the diversity in plant species and mix of plant communities on the rangelands that influences the behavior of wildlife and the grazing patterns of domestic animals. This variety in vegetation needs to be better understood in order to manage the rangelands and save the wildlife of Tibet. 
A baby Tibetan gazelle lies hidden in the grass in the Wild Yak Valley. It is July and fresh snow dusts the mountains.
The Tibetan antelope, perhaps more than any other animal, embodies the expanse of the Chang Tang ecosystem. The antelope is a migratory animal and needs a vast landscape in which to travel between its winter ranges and summer birthing grounds. They cover up to 250-300 miles one-way in their annual migration.
One summer, when working with Dr. George Schaller of the Wildlife Conservation Society in the Chang Tang Wildlife Reserve, we attempted to follow the antelope’s migration to their birthing grounds on the northern edge of the Tibetan Plateau.
A group of male Tibetan antelope in the Wild Yak Valley. Only male antelope have horns.
Observing herds of hundreds of female antelope, with their female young of the previous year, trekking on ancient paths to their summer birthing grounds as they have for thousands of years, is to bear witness to one of the earth’s outstanding ecological spectacles. 
Understanding Tibetan antelope migratory movements could provide valuable insight into the structure and function of the Tibetan Plateau ecosystem and assist in efforts to protect biodiversity.
The continuation of Tibetan antelope migration, one of the last, great natural marvels on earth, depends on better protection of the species, improved understanding of their ecology and better insights into the dynamics of the Tibetan Plateau ecosystem. It also requires innovative approaches to conservation and development that adopt participatory, integrated ecosystem management models that work at the landscape level with Tibetan nomads. 
A lone male Tibetan antelope in the Chang Tang Wildlife Reserve.
A bitter, cold wind whipped across the steppes, throwing sand in my face and making it difficult to hold the binoculars. The Tibetan wild ass, I had been watching must have caught my scent as the wind shifted because they suddenly stopped grazing, looked towards me and then wheeled around and took off running across the wind-swept steppes. 
Dust, kicked up from their hooves, swirled around them like steam from a hot spring, obscuring their russet and cream colored bodies and making it difficult to determine how many mares had foals. 
The wild ass created their own dust storm that enveloped them as they galloped across the windswept plains. The herd of wild ass turned into the wind, broke out of the dust cloud and strung out in a long line, trotting purposely like a troop of cavalry on the march. Foals ran alongside their mothers while bringing up the rear was the stallion; he kept the herd moving. As they trotted off, other herds of wild ass that had been scattered across the wide valley began to move as well, creating additional small, running dust storms. 
Tibetan wild ass.
The play of sunshine on the landscape from cloud shadows created spotlights, like brilliant stage lighting, highlighting the herds of wild ass as they moved in and out of the golden light.
Scattered across the dun-colored steppes were small groups of Tibetan antelope and Tibetan gazelle as well. As I got up from behind the sand dune where I had been laying I marveled at this display of wildlife on the plains before me.
Gathered in front of me was an assemblage of wild ungulates that rivaled the plains of East Africa or the prairies of North America. The Chang Tang is a notable example of a rangeland ecosystem relatively unchanged by humans and provides the untrammeled space for the migratory Tibetan antelope, large herds of wild yak, and wild ass to roam unfettered. It is one of the world’s great grazing land ecosystems. 

